My second computer project, Sugarscape, comes from a paper given by Robert Axtell of the Brookings Institution.
His presentation was largely a summary of Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up by Joshua M. Epstein and Robert L.
Axtell (Brookings Institution Press/MIT Press, ISBN 0-262-05053-6). It's a report on using computers in "bottom-up" social sciences to simulate
quite complex behavior with very simple rules. There's a CD-ROM version available with QuickTime movies of test runs.

Sugarscape starts simply. Consider a grid of 50 by 50 squares. Each square contains from zero to four units of "sugar."
The grid is inhabited by 400 creatures represented by dots. The creatures live on sugar (and nothing else), consuming from one to
three units per turn. These creatures can see from two to four squares in all directions, and they can move as far as they can see.

Each "year," the creatures are considered in random order, and when its turn comes, a creature looks in all directions, finds the
uninhabited square it can see that has the most sugar, goes there, and collects all the sugar in the square. It consumes what's
needed to keep it alive; if it hasn't got enough, it dies. If it got more than it consumes, it keeps the surplus.

We need one more rule: sugar replacement. That can be either full replacement (four unit squares are instantly restored to four units, etc.)
or partial replacement, such as one unit per year up to the square's starting level.

That's it. Fire it up and watch the dots move. With those simple rules, you get some pretty complex behavior. As you'd expect, the creatures with
long vision and low metabolism do the best. You can simulate evolution by keeping the number of creatures constant: if one dies, it is replaced
by another with random metabolism and vision. If you correlate vision with metabolic activity, you get a different result. Mostly, what you end up
with is a hunter/gatherer society of immortals.

Now you can add combat. One rule might be that the creature with the mos t sugar wins and takes the loser's supplies. You can add sexes with
mating and inheritance, including the computer equivalent of chromosomes and genes. You can let them age and die. You can add a second substance
so that commerce can develop. You can add cultures and education; and so on. Before you know it, with very simple rules you get very complicated
"societies." I was fascinated when I heard the paper, even more intrigued when I got the book, and couldn't wait to start building my own
Sugarscape experimental landscape.

The program isn't complicated. I have not used the actual Brookings program. I'm designing mine to make it easy to add rules I've thought of that
Epstein and Axtell don't seem to have tried. Besides, it's fun to plan the program.

They did most of their work on a Mac. What I'm planning is a bit more complicated. It would probably be easier to do this on a Mac, but it will run
faster on my Compaq workstation with dual Pentium Pro processors; besides, I have to learn VB and Delph i to get Roberta's program running in Win 95.
Both projects are taking longer than I like, but that's mostly because I'm also writing these columns, finishing two novels, and making several
out-of-town speeches. It's a great life if you don't weaken.
